[Music]
airplanes may be a marvel of modern
engineering but unless you're flying
first class it isn't what most people
would call glamorous for many the
biggest problem is how crowded airliners
can get but believe it or not there was
a time when flights rarely left more
than half full how is this possible well
I think it all depends on your optimism
I mean is your jet plane half-full or
half-empty now anyway our story begins
long ago in the Aquarian age known as
the 1970s it was a time when the lands
were overrun by roving pairs of
bell-bottom jeans whoo and let's not
forget about the platform shoes in this
mythic era of flare denim air travel was
strictly controlled by the federal
government the Federal Aviation
Administration the government body that
regulates air travel in the US had
complete authority over what routes
Airlines were able to fly the FAA also
had the power to control the ticket
prices and other fees airlines charge
their customers the only area where
airlines had nearly complete autonomy
was in how many flights could depart on
each route per day with no way of
expanding their reach or competing on
pricing airlines needed to find another
way to stand out from the crowd the
solution they all came up to was
accessibility it might be hard to
believe in a world where you must book
your flight months in advance but there
was a time when you could simply drive
to the airport on a whim and go almost
anywhere you wanted
did you still manage to miss your flight
don't worry because you could simply
trade your ticket in for another at no
additional fee what and don't forget
when you got on your plane half the
seats would be empty if you were lucky
you might even get the whole row to
yourself just imagine
no more people squeezing past you
elbowing you in the side think about the
next time you're stuck between two
snoring passengers as an eight-year-old
river dances on the back of your seat
now it's hard to make unlimited legroom
sound bad but all that extra space came
at a price and I mean that literally
when airline fees seem to be getting
higher and higher that's not the case
when you adjust for inflation the
average price of airfare in 1979 was
about 600 bucks in today's money
compare that to 2015 when the average
price was only about three hundred and
eighty-five dollars now those figures
only look at ticket prices not
additional costs like baggage fees but
that's still a difference of more than
$200 per seat
it turns out that all those extra
flights were cutting into the airline's
bottom line and they were passing that
markup on to you personally I think
shelling out a little extra moolah is a
fair trade for some elbow room but
that's just me I suppose if you really
wanted an increase in airline real
estate you could pay extra for a
first-class ticket but more than
doubling your airfare might be a little
too extreme hey what do you think let me
know in the comments if you prefer the
cheap seat in coach or if the extra
legroom is worth the added cost of a
first-class ticket and if you're going
first-class you want to bring along a
friend me two things brought an end to
these Helicon days of ample knee space
the first came in the form of relaxed
FAA regulations while modern air travel
isn't exactly the Wild West from 1978
Airlines had much more freedom in how
they operate free from price controls
and restricted routes costs fell as
airlines struggle to undercut each
other's prices these effects weren't
felt immediately only 1 to 2 percent
every year still these discounts started
to add up over time
unfortunately planes are just as
expensive to operate as they've been
before the deregulation lower prices
came at the cost of being packed in like
sardines the second significant change
was a technological life in the analog
world of the 1970s there wasn't a whole
lot companies could do to adjust prices
on-the-fly sure when you bought your
ticket might affect the cost and flying
first-class was obviously more expensive
but a seating coach was a seating coach
as far as airfare was concerned this is
no longer true due to one thing the
algorithm hmm there was supposed to be
some lighting and dramatic music when I
said that let me try it yet the yeah
that's better anyway
modern airlines have entire departments
dedicated to writing the code that goes
into determining the price of an
individual seat from just a few pricing
categories airlines now offer dozens and
the fees are constantly changing to
ensure the maximum possible booking on
every flight airlines have also taken to
adding more seats to each plane and
regularly selling more tickets than they
have seats
the idea behind deliberate over booking
is that a certain percentage of
passengers are going to miss their
flight or cancel last-minute that leaves
them with empty unprofitable seats by
overbooking they guarantee that planes
take off with as close to a full load as
possible the side effect is that
sometimes more people show up and expect
it and someone ends up getting left
behind how many of us have wound up
stranded at the terminal
to overbooking even long-distance
overnighters seem to draw a pretty big
crowd overcrowding isn't the only reason
why some people might be nostalgic for a
previous era of commercial aviation
seats have been steadily getting smaller
to cram warp passengers into the same
space meanwhile extra fees have been
getting larger and more numerous prior
to 2008 no major airline charged passage
for the first check back when American
Airlines first began charging a $15 fee
for the first check bag people thought
they'd lost their minds now you'd be
hard-pressed to find an airline that
doesn't Airlines can get away with this
in large part because of how few of them
are left in the year 2000 the United
States was home to 10 major airlines a
number that has been slowly whittled
down to just four by 2017 with these
four dominating well over 80 percent of
the market there aren't many places for
customers to turn sure there are plenty
of regional airlines good for short hops
from city to city but if you're looking
to fly cross-country or internationally
options are limited depending on where
you are and where you're going you might
not even have a choice at all still
there's one bright spot to modern air
travel that I haven't touched on yet and
that's the environmental impact all
those extra flights that Airlines used
to schedule burned a lot of jet fuel
while the 70s may have been an excellent
time for airline customers all those
extra flights weren't exactly healthy
for the environment while Peter Piper is
packing more passengers into fewer
planes might not be what anyone calls a
good time it had the unintended but 100%
positive side effect of reducing the
pollution air lies produced as terrible
news for any Captain Planet villains in
the audience but great news for pretty
much everyone else
boy that's a dated reference isn't it
well come to think of it so on
now we probably shouldn't give these big
corporations too much credit for going
green by accident and in a way that
makes them more money it doesn't really
excuse or even explain everything else
airlines do in the name of the bottom
line still it's something and who
doesn't like ending on a happy note I
like B flat myself and hey if you learn
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend and
here are some other cool videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life